# py-package-template

Template for creating a python package repository. 

> [!TIP]
> Use GitHub's autogenerated table of contents to scroll throught this document.

## Setting up the git workflow

### Cloning the repo

```
git clone ssh://git@git.example.com/project/repo
cd repo
# create detached HEAD with no files on the directory (cleaner structure)
git checkout $(git commit-tree $(git hash-object -t tree /dev/null) < /dev/null)
# create new worktree corresponding to the `main` branch
git worktree add main main
```

Justification of working with git worktrees: [ref1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2uEqYw-N8uE) [ref2](https://morgan.cugerone.com/blog/how-to-use-git-worktree-and-in-a-clean-way/)

Another advantage of using the described method is that it is possible to install different branches of the project in edible mode in different virtual environments (e.g. `pip install -e main/`). 
If git worktrees are not used, then one needs to remember to checkout to the correct branch when using each virtual environment, which is very error prone. 

Best way I found to work with worktrees is described in [this ref](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/54367011/git-bare-repositories-worktrees-and-tracking-branches) 
which corresponds:
* not using `--bare` due to the problems with `git fetch` and `git pull`
* removing everything in the repository in a detached HEAD (with `git checkout $(git commit-tree $(git hash-object -t tree /dev/null) < /dev/null)`) so that in the `repo` directory there are only the worktree directories (so it is cleaner)

### Creating new worktrees

```
git worktree add new-branch-name
cd new-branch-name
git merge main --allow-unrelated-histories
```

The last command (`git merge main --allow-unrelated-histories`) is required to populate the new worktree directory (remember that by default the `repo` directory is an empty detached HEAD). 
The option `--allow-unrelated-histories` is required because the detached head and `main` have no common previous commit so git would throw an error. 

### Setting up PR requests

Allow only `squash merging` for the PR requests. This can be done in `Settings > General > Pull Requests` by unselecting all the options except the `Allow squash merging`. 

It is useful to set up the `Default commit message` to be the `Pull request title`.


## Managing the requirements for the python package

The `pyproject.toml` file shouldn't have strict requirements (i.e. specific versions pinned) unless there is a known bug in the current version of the libraries used. In this repo there is an example of `pyproject.toml`. 

The specific versions should be pinned in the `requirements.txt` and the `requirements-dev.txt`. This can be done using `pip-tools` and the following commands:

```
# pip install pip-tools
pip-compile -o requirements.txt pyproject.toml
pip-compile --extra dev -o dev-requirements.txt pyproject.toml
```


## Publishing the package to PyPI

The steps to perform are ([ref](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/)):
1. Build the package
1. Use TestPyPI to test the release
1. Relase package in PyPI
1. Add tag and release in GitHub

### Build the package

```
pip install --upgrade pip build
python -m build
```
This should output a lot of text and once completed should generate two files in the `dist/` directory. The `.tar.gz` file is a source distribution whereas the `.whl` file is a built distribution. 

### Test the release in TestPyPI

To securely upload your project, you’ll need a PyPI API token. Create one [here](https://test.pypi.org/manage/account/#api-tokens), setting the “Scope” to “Entire account”.

```
pip install --upgrade twine
python -m twine upload --repository testpypi dist/*
```

You will be prompted for a username and password. For the username, use `__token__`. For the password, use the token value, including the `pypi-` prefix.
Once uploaded, your package should be viewable on TestPyPI; for example: `https://test.pypi.org/project/example_package_YOUR_USERNAME_HERE`.

To check that the installation works, run the following commands:

```
pip install --upgrade virtualenv
virtualenv venv/
source ./venv/bin/activate
pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ --no-deps example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE
python -c "import example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE"
deactivate
rm -r venv/
```

### Release in PyPI

If the package has been released correctly to TestPyPI, it can be released to PyPI using:

```
# (activate the previous virtual environment)
python -m twine upload dist/*
```

### Add tag and release in GitHub

To add a tag (e.g. `v0.1.0`), run:
```
git tag <tagname>
git push origin --tags
```
